IT has revolutionized the field of medicine. In this fast-paced world of medicine, managing a multi-specialty hospital is a daunting task. A hospital management system (HMS) is a computer-based or web-based system that facilitates the management of a hospital or medical center like clinics, dispensaries, and labs. This system or software helps to make the entire operation paperless. It consolidates all the information about patients, doctors, staff, hospital administrative data, etc. in a single software. It has sections for the different professionals that make up a hospital.
To get a free demo of the Embebo Hospital Management System, please click www.embebo.com
Doctors
Hospital Management System contains a list of doctors and their timetables. It will include doctors' emergency numbers. A doctor can check his own and other doctors' schedules and working hours. This helps the doctor to work according to their schedule. HMS/CMS contains a list of medicines available for certain conditions so that the doctor can easily look for an alternative when required. The patient can make an appointment based on the doctor's schedule. The use of HMS makes the connection between doctor and patient easy and hassle-free.
Patient information
New patients will be able to register on the system. The medical record system which is in-built stores all the basic and medical details of the patients. Some system comes with the feature to store photos of the patients as identity proof which can also help in medico-legal cases of false identities or fraud cases.
Occupancy
Using HMS one can quickly check the availability of rooms/beds in hospitals or clinics so that the receptionist can adjust the transfer of patients from one ward to another or allot the bed to the newly admitted patient. This data has to be constantly updated to keep a track of discharged patients. Schedule of operation theatres can be kept for multi-specialty hospitals. This helps the receptionist or the nurses to check the availability of theatres that are vacant to slot other surgeries.
Staff
IT includes names and shift timing of the nurses and ward boys on duty in their respective ward numbers. The instructions given by a doctor to the nurse for each patient are entered into the system.
Supplies control
A thorough inventory of hospitals/clinics can be maintained about the stock of supplies in the hospital like surgical instruments, medications, laboratory supplies, stationery, staff supplies, etc. This record helps the administration to monitor and keep control of the wastage of the supplies.
Billing
A separate automated section is used for billing purposes. HMS keeps a record and sums up all the expenses of an admitted patient or outdoor patient at one time and produces a complete bill at the end of the consultation or discharge. This saves time and effort for every department as they need to generate separate information
Insurance

The respective insurance company can check the details of the insured before finalizing the policy or during the process of passing the claim. The data is can be stored in the database and hence can be recovered without the risk of damage for later use by the hospital or patient or insurance company.
Laboratory/Radiology
When the tests are advised by the doctor the same information is updated in the HMS and directly received by the laboratory. This interfacing helps to reduce errors caused by the staff at the time of testing. Since all the data is fed in the system, which one can retrieve and review the past reports of the patients anytime. This section also includes details of the blood bank with available supplies 
Employees

This section includes basic information of the employees including verified contact numbers and addresses along with professional details. Every new employee will be registered in the system. Health records of the employees also can be entered for their benefit.
Statistical Reports
All the data in an HMS  can be analyzed when required as it is integrated. This will create a statistical database for the internal use of the hospital which can be forwarded to the administration. This section helps the administration in summarizing the expenses of the hospital and estimating the necessary and unnecessary expenditures.
Telehealthcare
A Web-based HMS can be used for providing digital health services to patients, appointments, and obtaining opinions of consultants sitting away from the hospital set up which can be most useful for handicaps and senior citizens.
One thing every hospital worries about is the security aspect of the data. Hence, an HMS has photo identifications, passwords, fingerprint lock, etc. to prevent any leakage of important information or records. With the help of this system, one can access all the essential information anytime and anywhere on their digital devices. Another advantage is that it can be modified and customized to suit a  laboratory, small hospital, or multi-specialty hospital. As it provides multiple facilities, it helps in reducing hospital costs, which in turn reduces the expense of quality healthcare given to the patient.
